What's New 110, Experiments for Stable 109/Canary 112 (#2427)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/whats-new/2023/02/devtools-110.md

---
title: What's new in DevTools (Microsoft Edge 110)

> description: "Entry 1. And more."

Author: todo: real description string.

author: MSEdgeTeam
ms.author: msedgedevrel
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.prod: microsoft-edge
ms.date: 02/09/2023
---
# What's New in DevTools (Microsoft Edge 110)

[!INCLUDE [Microsoft Edge team note for top of What's New](../../includes/edge-whats-new-note.md)]

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Taking heap snapshots in the Memory tool is now faster

<!-- Subtitle: When taking a heap snapshot greater than 1 GB in size, the time spent generating the snapshot in the Memory tool is at least 70% faster. -->

In previous versions of Microsoft Edge, generating large heap snapshots (over 1 GB) in the **Memory** tool could take anywhere from 2 to 15 minutes, depending on the size of your website or app, and how many elements were stored in memory.

> In Microsoft Edge 110, the **Memory** tool is now much faster at taking heap snapshots.  Taking a heap snapshot is now around 70% to 86% faster.  For larger heap snapshots, we're seeing the greatest improvement in speed.  If you have noticed that taking heap snapshots is much faster, please leave us feedback in [[Feedback] Heap Snapshot Visualizer #128](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/DevTools/issues/128).<!-- todo: change to the real link text and URL -->

Author: @zoherghadyali - need real link to Issue

> ![Taking a heap snapshot in the Memory tool](./devtools-110-images/faster-heap-snapshot.png)

Author: global: create final screenshots if needed

Author: finalized most screenshots

See also:
* [Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool](../../../memory-problems/heap-snapshots.md#take-a-snapshot)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Move tools between the Activity Bar and Quick View more easily in Focus Mode

<!-- Subtitle: Customize both the Activity Bar and Quick View in Focus Mode to see only the tools you care about. -->

> Microsoft Edge 110 contains various improvements to **Focus Mode** in DevTools.  The following changes make it easier to customize the Activity Bar and Quick View, to show only the tools that you're currently interested in.

Author: maybe add h4s to separate the items, so that some items can have png and others not, yet keep the items visually distinct

Author: added most of the needed screenshots

The right-click menu for moving an optional tool between Quick View and the Activity Bar now includes the position of the Activity Bar, such as:
* **Move to left Activity Bar**
* **Move to top Activity Bar**

> <!-- todo: screenshot -->

Author: todo: screenshot 3x & refine wording accordingly

* The position of the context menu itself for moving tools no longer displays over the tool title in the toolbar.
<!-- todo: screenshot -->

* For keyboard shortcut and assistive technology users, focus is preserved in the Activity Bar or Quick View when moving the currently selected tool from one to the other or removing it.
<!-- todo: screenshot -->

![Moving the Network Conditions tool from Quick View to the Activity Bar](./devtools-110-images/focus-mode-moving-tools-context-menu.png)

See also:
* [Simplify DevTools using Focus Mode](../../../experimental-features/focus-mode.md)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Screen readers correctly report when the More Tools menu is expanded

> <!-- Subtitle: Screen readers correctly report when the More Tools menu is expanded. -->

Author: @zoherghadyali - make Subtitle != h2 wording

Author: redesigned locally as h4

In previous versions of Microsoft Edge, screen readers reported that the **More tools** (![Plus sign](./devtools-110-images/more-tools-focus-mode-icon.png)) button was collapsed, when the **More tools** menu was actually expanded.  In Microsoft Edge 110, this issue has been fixed.

Screen readers now correctly report when the **More tools** (![Plus sign icon](./devtools-110-images/more-tools-focus-mode-icon.png)) menu is expanded:

![The 'More tools' menu in Focus Mode](./devtools-110-images/a11y-focus-mode-more-tools.png)

See also:
* [Navigate DevTools with assistive technology](../../../accessibility/navigation.md)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Change Dock location and Activity Bar location by using the keyboard

> <!-- Subtitle: Change Dock location and Activity Bar location by using the keyboard. -->

Author: @zoherghadyali - make Subtitle != h2 wording

Author: redesigned locally as h4

In previous versions of Microsoft Edge, in Focus Mode, it wasn't possible to change the **Dock location** or the **Activity Bar location** via the keyboard.  In Microsoft Edge 110, this issue has been fixed.

In Focus Mode, you can now change the Dock location and the Activity Bar location from the **Customize and control DevTools** (![Ellipses icon](./devtools-110-images/customize-devtools-focus-mode-icon.png)) menu by using the arrow keys:

![Changing the Dock location in Focus Mode by pressing arrow keys](./devtools-110-images/a11y-focus-mode-dock-location.png)

See also:
* [Navigate DevTools with assistive technology](../../../accessibility/navigation.md)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Screen readers announce which theme is currently selected when scrolling through themes

> <!-- Subtitle: Screen readers now announce which theme is currently selected when scrolling through themes. -->

Author: Instance 3
@zoherghadyali - make Subtitle != h2 wording

Author: redesigned locally as h4

In previous versions of Microsoft Edge, generating large heap snapshots (over 1 GB) in the **Memory** tool could take anywhere from 2 to 15 minutes, depending on the size of your website or app, and how many elements were stored in memory.

In Microsoft Edge 110, the **Memory** tool is now 70% to 86% faster at taking heap snapshots.  For larger heap snapshots, we're seeing the greatest improvement in speed.  If you've noticed that taking heap snapshots is much faster, please leave us feedback in [[Feedback] Taking heap snapshots in the Memory tool is now faster #131](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/DevTools/issues/131).

![Taking a heap snapshot in the Memory tool](./devtools-110-images/faster-heap-snapshot.png)

See also:
* [Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool](../../../memory-problems/heap-snapshots.md#take-a-snapshot)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Move tools between the Activity Bar and Quick View more easily in Focus Mode

<!-- Subtitle: Customize both the Activity Bar and Quick View in Focus Mode to see only the tools you care about. -->

> Microsoft Edge 110 contains various improvements to **Focus Mode** in DevTools.  The following changes make it easier to customize the Activity Bar and Quick View, to show only the tools that you're currently interested in.

Reviewer: I know we have a "see also" link at the bottom of this section. Should we also include a link here? Otherwise, one would have to read the whole thing before finding the link.

https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/experimental-features/focus-mode?branch=pr-en-us-2427

Author: Microsoft Edge 110 contains various improvements to [Focus Mode](../../../experimental-features/focus-mode.md) in DevTools.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### When moving a tool, the right-click menu shows the current placement of the destination toolbar

The right-click menu command for moving a tool between Quick View and the Activity Bar now indicates the placement of the destination toolbar, such as:
* **Move to bottom Quick View**
* **Move to side Quick View**
* **Move to left Activity Bar**
* **Move to top Activity Bar**

![Right-click menu showing 'Move to bottom Quick View'](./devtools-110-images/move-to-bottom-quick-view.png)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### The right-click menu is no longer displayed over the tool's tab in the toolbar

> The right-click menu for moving a tool between the Activity Bar and Quick View no longer obscures the tool's name in the toolbar:

Author: ```suggestion
The right-click menu for moving a tool between the Activity Bar and Quick View no longer obscures the tool's name in the toolbar.
```

![Changing themes in Focus Mode](./devtools-110-images/a11y-focus-mode-themes-menu.png)

See also:
* [Navigate DevTools with assistive technology](../../../accessibility/navigation.md)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## The Network, Console, Issues, and Sources tools have improved support for contrast themes

<!-- Subtitle: When a Windows contrast theme is applied, using DevTools is now easier. -->

DevTools in Microsoft Edge 110 now has better support for Windows contrast themes.  The **Network**, **Console**, **Issues**, and **Sources** tools have all been improved so that the tools render correctly with contrast themes.

In the **Issues** tool, with the **Desert** contrast theme applied in Windows, when you put focus on a particular issue, the details about the issue were displayed against a solid background, which made the text hard to read.  In Microsoft Edge 110, this has been fixed, by using an outline instead of a solid background:

> ![The Issues tool with the Desert contrast theme applied](./devtools-110-images/hc-mode-issues-tool.png)

Author: redo, not Doc site

---
title: What's new in DevTools (Microsoft Edge 110)
description: "Faster heap snapshots in Memory tool. Move tools between Activity Bar and Quick View in Focus Mode. Screen readers report when More Tools is expanded. Change Dock and Activity Bar location via keyboard. Screen readers announce which theme is selected. Improved support for contrast themes. And more."
author: MSEdgeTeam
ms.author: msedgedevrel
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.prod: microsoft-edge
ms.date: 02/09/2023
---
# What's New in DevTools (Microsoft Edge 110)

[!INCLUDE [Microsoft Edge team note for top of What's New](../../includes/edge-whats-new-note.md)]

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Taking heap snapshots in the Memory tool is now faster

<!-- Subtitle: When taking a heap snapshot greater than 1 GB in size, the time spent generating the snapshot in the Memory tool is at least 70% faster. -->

In previous versions of Microsoft Edge, generating large heap snapshots (over 1 GB) in the **Memory** tool could take anywhere from 2 to 15 minutes, depending on the size of your website or app, and how many elements were stored in memory.

> In Microsoft Edge 110, the **Memory** tool is now much faster at taking heap snapshots.  Taking a heap snapshot is now around 70% to 86% faster.  For larger heap snapshots, we're seeing the greatest improvement in speed.  If you have noticed that taking heap snapshots is much faster, please leave us feedback in [[Feedback] Taking heap snapshots in the Memory tool is now faster #131](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/DevTools/issues/131).

Author: fixed locally (was thinking about this exact rewording, to further condense)

![Taking a heap snapshot in the Memory tool](./devtools-110-images/faster-heap-snapshot.png)

See also:
* [Record heap snapshots using the Memory tool](../../../memory-problems/heap-snapshots.md#take-a-snapshot)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Move tools between the Activity Bar and Quick View more easily in Focus Mode

<!-- Subtitle: Customize both the Activity Bar and Quick View in Focus Mode to see only the tools you care about. -->

Microsoft Edge 110 contains various improvements to **Focus Mode** in DevTools.  The following changes make it easier to customize the Activity Bar and Quick View, to show only the tools that you're currently interested in.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

> #### Right-click menu shows the current location of the other toolbar to move a tool to

Author: fixed locally

> The right-click menu for moving an optional tool between Quick View and the Activity Bar now includes the position of the Activity Bar, such as:

Author: changed locally

* **Move to bottom Quick View**
* **Move to side Quick View**
* **Move to left Activity Bar**
* **Move to top Activity Bar**

> ![Right-click menu showing 'Move to bottom Quick View'](./devtools-110-images/move-to-bottom-quick-view.png)

Author: changed locally

See also:
* [Simplify DevTools using Focus Mode](../../../experimental-features/focus-mode.md)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

> #### Tool name remains visible when you right-click the tool icon

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### The right-click menu no longer displays over the tool in the toolbar
```
We've already called it the "right-click menu" in the previous announcement. I don't have a preference for a better name (maybe "context menu") but I just want us to be consistent between this announcement and the previous one

Author: Changed locally.

fwiw, Bing hit count:
"right-click menu": 5.5M hits
"context menu": 2M hits
"shortcut menu": 1.4M hits

"right-click" is popular in common use b/c concrete, not abstract.

__

per previous grammar research, going with:
#### The right-click menu is no longer displayed over the tool in the toolbar
Usage is either "x is displayed", or "x displays y".
Corp style guide removed the entry for "display, appear".

The context menu for moving a tool between the Activity Bar and Quick View no longer obscures the tool's title in the toolbar:

For example, the **Network Conditions** tool name remains visible when you right-click the tool's tab in Quick View:

![The right-click menu in Quick View](./devtools-110-images/focus-mode-moving-tools-context-menu.png)

> As another example, the **Network** tool name remains visible when you right-click the tool's tab in the Activity Bar:

Author: @zoherghadyali - Does this fix affect the Activity Bar, or only Quick View?  re: "Tool name remains visible when you right-click the tool icon"

Reviewer 2: It's true for both the Quick View and the Activity Bar. The right-click menu doesn't render on top of either toolbar

![The right-click menu in the Activity Bar](./devtools-110-images/tool-name-remains-visible.png)

> See also:

Reviewer 2: Instead of having 2 "See also" sections for this announcement, can we just have the 3 h4 headers and then one see also section at the end. They all link to the same place so it seems excessive

* [Simplify DevTools using Focus Mode](../../../experimental-features/focus-mode.md)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Focus is preserved in Activity Bar or Quick View when moving a tool between them

> For keyboard shortcut and assistive technology users, focus is preserved in the Activity Bar or Quick View when moving the currently selected tool from one to the other or removing it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For keyboard shortcut and assistive technology users, focus is preserved in the Activity Bar or Quick View when moving the currently selected tool from one toolbar to the other or when removing a tool from the toolbar.
```

> <!-- todo: is focus preserved within the tool, or within the toolbar? -->

Author: @zoherghadyali - not sure I understand "focus is preserved" in toolbar.  Is this regarding which tool is selected in the source toolbar rather than the destination toolbar?  

Can I depict this focus behavior in a screenshot?
Is it feasible to show this in a screenshot, is there a focus-box or highlighting of what's focused, in this scenario?

Reviewer 2: It's hard to show this without a video since you are trying to show the focused tool before/after moving a tool but here's what I got:

Here, the Network tool has been moved to the bottom Quick View. The right-click menu is opened.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/34316555/217680379-6f290c55-cc33-4f35-8ba7-28b339319d48.png)

If you now selected the "Remove from Quick View" option, then focus will go to the **Network conditions** tool which is the next tool in Quick View:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/34316555/217680562-b9778712-1305-469f-a60f-d56553a5036e.png)

Author: updated text, added the pngs.  next, redo pngs...

Author: added todo cmts for redo's, so closing

<!-- todo: screenshot?
![alt text](./devtools-110-images/filename.png)
-->

> See also:

Reviewer 2: See my previous comment about the third See also link. I don't think we need this content 3 times.

* [Simplify DevTools using Focus Mode](../../../experimental-features/focus-mode.md)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Accessibility improvements for themes, customizing locations, and the More Tools button

<!-- Subtitle: Using assistive technology such as screen readers and keyboard shortcuts with DevTools is now easier. -->

The following accessibility issues have been fixed, and using assistive technology such as screen readers and keyboard shortcuts with DevTools is now easier.

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Screen readers correctly report when the More Tools menu is expanded

In previous versions of Microsoft Edge, screen readers reported that the **More tools** (![Plus sign](./devtools-110-images/more-tools-focus-mode-icon.png)) button was collapsed, when the **More tools** menu was actually expanded.  In Microsoft Edge 110, this issue has been fixed.

Screen readers now correctly report when the **More tools** (![Plus sign icon](./devtools-110-images/more-tools-focus-mode-icon.png)) menu is expanded:

![The 'More tools' menu in Focus Mode](./devtools-110-images/a11y-focus-mode-more-tools.png)

> See also:

Reviewer 2: See my previous comment about the See also links. I don't think we need this 3 times for just this announcement. I think we only need one See also link at the end.

* [Navigate DevTools with assistive technology](../../../accessibility/navigation.md)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Change Dock location and Activity Bar location by using the keyboard

In previous versions of Microsoft Edge, in Focus Mode, it wasn't possible to change the **Dock location** or the **Activity Bar location** via the keyboard.  In Microsoft Edge 110, this issue has been fixed.

In Focus Mode, you can now change the Dock location and the Activity Bar location from the **Customize and control DevTools** (![Ellipses icon](./devtools-110-images/customize-devtools-focus-mode-icon.png)) menu by using the arrow keys:

![Changing the Dock location in Focus Mode by pressing arrow keys](./devtools-110-images/a11y-focus-mode-dock-location.png)

See also:
* [Navigate DevTools with assistive technology](../../../accessibility/navigation.md)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Screen readers announce which theme is currently selected when scrolling through themes

> In previous versions of Microsoft Edge, when scrolling through the list of themes for DevTools, screen readers didn't report whether a theme was selected.  In Microsoft Edge 110, this issue has been fixed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In previous versions of Microsoft Edge, when scrolling through the list of themes for DevTools, screen readers didn't announce whether or not a theme was selected.  In Microsoft Edge 110, this issue has been fixed.
```

Author: fixed locally

Screen readers now announce which theme is currently selected when scrolling through themes from the **Customize and control DevTools** (![The Ellipses icon](./devtools-110-images/customize-devtools-focus-mode-icon.png)) menu:

![Changing themes in Focus Mode](./devtools-110-images/a11y-focus-mode-themes-menu.png)

See also:
* [Navigate DevTools with assistive technology](../../../accessibility/navigation.md)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## The Network, Console, Issues, and Sources tools have improved support for contrast themes

<!-- Subtitle: When a Windows contrast theme is applied, using DevTools is now easier. -->

DevTools in Microsoft Edge 110 now has better support for Windows contrast themes.  The **Network**, **Console**, **Issues**, and **Sources** tools have all been improved so that the tools render correctly with contrast themes.

In the **Issues** tool, with the **Desert** contrast theme applied in Windows, focus on a particular issue was displayed with a solid background, which made the text hard to see.  In Microsoft Edge 110, this has been fixed, by using an outline instead of a solid background:

> ![The Issues tool with the Desert contrast theme applied](./devtools-110-images/hc-mode-issues-tool.png)

Author: todo: finalize these two screenshots, as whole window

Author: done locally
